Genesis, chapters 46 through 50, from the Holy Bible, King James Version.
And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and offered
sacrifices unto the God of his father, Isaac.
And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob.
And he said, Here am I.
And he said, I am God, the God of thy father.
Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.
I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also surely bring thee up again, and
Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
And Jacob rose up from Beersheba, and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father,
and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry
him.
And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan,
and came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him, his sons and his sons' sons with
him, his daughters and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into
Egypt.
And these are the names of the children of Israel which came into Egypt, Jacob and his
sons, Reuben, Jacob's first born, and the sons of Reuben, Hainach and Falu and Hezren
and Carmi, and the sons of Simeon, Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jakin and Zohar and
and the sons of Levi, Gershon, Kohath and Marari, and the sons of Judah, Ur and Onan
and Shelah and Phares and Zirah, but Ur and Onan died in the land of Canaan, and the sons
of Phares were Hezren and Hamel, and the sons of Issachar, Tola and Fuva and Job and Shimron,
and the sons of Zebulon, Seiread and Elan and Jahlil. These be the sons of Leah which
she bear unto Jacob and Paedon Aram with his daughter Dinah, all the souls of his sons
and his daughters were thirty and three.
And the sons of Gad, Ziphion and Haggai, Shunai and Esben, Eri and Erodai and Erili, and the
sons of Biraeah, Heber and Malkiel. These are the sons of Zilpah whom Laban gave to
Leah his daughter and these she bear unto Jacob even sixteen souls. The sons of Rachel
Jacob's wife, Joseph and Benjamin, and unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh
and Ephraim which Azaneth the daughter of Potipharah, priest of An, bear unto him. And
the sons of Benjamin were Bela and Beker and Ashbel, Gira and Naaman, Ehai and Rosh, Muppim
and Huppim and Ard. These are the sons of Rachel which were born to Jacob, all the souls
were fourteen.
And the sons of Dan, Hushim, and the sons of Naphtali, Jaziel and Gunai and Jezer and
Shilam. These are the sons of Bilhah which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter and she
bear these unto Jacob. All the souls were seven. All the souls that came with Jacob
into Egypt which came out of his loins besides Jacob's son's wives, all the souls were threescore
and six. And the sons of Joseph which were born him in Egypt were two souls. All the
souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were threescore and ten. And he sent
Judah before him unto Joseph to direct his face unto Goshen and they came into the land
of Goshen. And Joseph made ready his chariot and went up to meet Israel his father to Goshen
and presented himself unto him and he fell on his neck and wept on his neck a good while.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die since I have seen thy face because thou art
yet alive. And Joseph said unto his brethren and unto his father's house, I will go up
and show Pharaoh and say unto him, My brethren and my father's house which were in the land
of Canaan are come unto me. And the men are shepherds for their trade hath been to feed
cattle and they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have. And
it shall come to pass when Pharaoh shall call you and shall say, What is your occupation?
That ye shall say, Thy servant's trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until
now, both we and also our fathers. That ye may dwell in the land of Goshen for every
shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
Chapter 47 Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh and said, My father and my brethren and their
flocks and their herds and all that they have are come out of the land of Canaan and behold
they are in the land of Goshen. And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And
they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we and also our fathers. They said moreover
unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come, for thy servants have no pasture
for their flocks, for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan. Now therefore we pray
thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee,
the land of Egypt is before thee, in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to
dwell, in the land of Goshen let them dwell, and if thou knowest any men of activity among
them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed
Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?
And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and
thirty years. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.
And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of
Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Ramesses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
And Joseph nourished his father and his brethren, and all his father's household with bread,
according to their families. And there was no bread in all the land, for
the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted
by reason of the famine. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land
of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought, and Joseph brought
the money into Pharaoh's house. And when money failed in the land of Egypt and in the land
of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread, for why should we
die in thy presence? for the money faileth. And Joseph said, Give your cattle, and I will
give you for your cattle, if money fail. And they brought their cattle unto Joseph, and
Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of
the herds, and for the asses, and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.
When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will
not hide it from my Lord, how that our money is spent. My Lord also hath our herds of cattle.
There is not aught left in the sight of my Lord, but our bodies and our lands. Wherefore
shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and
we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh. And give us seed that we may live and not
die, that the land be not desolate. And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh,
for the Egyptians sold every man his field because the famine prevailed over them, so
the land became Pharaoh's. And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one
end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof. Only the land of the priests
bought he not, for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their
portion which Pharaoh gave them, wherefore they sold not their lands. Then Joseph said
unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh. Lo, here
is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land. And it shall come to pass in the increase
that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed
of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your
little ones. And they said, Thou hast saved our lives. Let us find grace in the sight
of my Lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants. And Joseph made it a law over the land of
Egypt unto this day that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests
only, which became not Pharaoh's. And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt in the country
of Goshen, and they had possessions therein, and grew and multiplied exceedingly. And Jacob
lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years, so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty
and seven years. And the time drew nigh that Israel must die, and he called his son Joseph,
and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under
my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt. But I
will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying
place. And he said, I will do as thou hast said. And he said, Swear unto me. And he
swear unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.
CHAPTER 48 And it came to pass after these things that
one told Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick. And he took with him his two sons Manasseh
and Ephraim. And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee. And
Israel strengthened himself and sat upon the bed.
And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and
blessed me, and said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and
I will make of thee a multitude of people, and will give this land to thy seed after
thee for an everlasting possession. And now thy two sons Ephraim and Manasseh,
which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine.
As Reuben and Simeon they shall be mine. And thy issue, which thou begettest after them,
shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren and their inheritance.
And as for me, when I came from Paden, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way,
when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath, and I buried her there in the
way of Ephrath, the same as Bethlehem. And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said,
Who were these? And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in
this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see, and he brought them
near unto him, and he kissed them, and embraced them. And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not
thought to see thy face, and lo, God hath showed me also thy seed. And Joseph brought
them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth. And Joseph
took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in
his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him. And Israel
stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger,
and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly, for Manasseh was the
first born. And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac
did walk, the God which fed me all my life long, unto this day, the angel which redeemed
me from all evil, bless the lads, and let my name be named on them, and the name of
my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the
earth. And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim,
it displeased him, and he held up his father's hand to remove it from Ephraim's head unto
Manasseh's head. And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father, for this is the
first born, put thy right hand upon his head. And his father refused, and said, I know it,
my son, I know it. He also shall become a people, and he also shall be great. But truly
his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude
of nations. And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying,
God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh, and he set Ephraim before Manasseh. And Israel
said unto Joseph, Behold, I die, but God shall be with you and bring you again unto the land
of your fathers. Moreover, I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which
I took out of the hand of the Amorite, with my sword and with my bow.
Chapter 49 And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather
yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days. Gather
yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob, and hearken unto Israel, your father.
Reuben, thou art my first born, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency
of dignity, and the excellency of power. Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel, because thou
wentest up to thy father's bed, then defiledst thou it. He went up to my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my
soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united,
for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall. Cursed
be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel, I will divide them
in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, thy hand shall be in the neck of
thine enemies, thy father's children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a lion's whelp.
From the prey, my son, thou art gone up. He stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as
an old lion, who shall rouse him up? The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver
from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of the people
be. Binding his foal unto the vine, and his asses colt unto the choice-vine, he washed
his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes. His eyes shall be red with
wine, and his teeth white with milk. Zebulon shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and he
shall be for an haven of ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon. Issachar is a strong
ass couching down between two burdens, and he saw that rest was good, and the land that
it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. Dan
shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a serpent by the way,
an adder in the path, that biteth the horse-heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. I have
waited for thy salvation, O Lord. Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome
at the last. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal deities.
Naphtali is a hind let loose, he giveth goodly words. Joseph is a fruitful bow, even a fruitful
bow by a well, whose branches run over the wall. The archers have sorely grieved him,
and shot at him, and hated him. But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. From thence is the shepherd
the stone of Israel. Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee, and by the Almighty,
who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under,
blessings of the breasts, and of the womb. The blessings of thy father have prevailed
above the blessings of my progenitors, unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills.
They shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate
from his brethren. Benjamin shall raven as a wolf. In the morning he shall devour the
prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel,
and this is it that their fathers spake unto them, and blessed them. Everyone according
to his blessing, he blessed them. And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered
unto my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the
Hittite, in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, and the
land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite, for a possession
of a burying place. There they buried Abraham, and Sarah his wife. There they buried Isaac
and Rebekah his wife, and there I buried Leah. The purchase of the field, and of the cave
that is therein, was from the children of Heth. And when Jacob had made an end of commanding
his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered
unto his people.
CHAPTER 50 And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and
stepped upon him, and kissed him. And Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to
embalm his father, and the physicians embalmed Israel. And forty days were fulfilled for
him, for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed, and the Egyptians mourned
for him three score and ten days. And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph
spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak,
I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die,
in my grave which I have digged for me, in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury
me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.
And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
And Joseph went up to bury his father, and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh,
the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt, and all the house of
Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's house. Only their little ones, and their flocks,
and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen. And there went up with him both chariots
and horsemen, and it was a very great company. And they came to the threshing floor of Atad,
which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation, and
he made a mourning for his father seven days. And when the inhabitants of the land, the
grievous mourning to the Egyptians, wherefore the name of it was called Abel-Misraim, which
is beyond Jordan. And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them, for his sons
carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah,
which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burying-place of Ephra on
the Hittite, before Mamre. And Joseph returned into Egypt, he and his brethren, and all that
went up with him, to bury his father, after he had buried his father. And when Joseph's
brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and
will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him. And they sent a messenger
unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying, So shall ye say unto
Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren and their sin, for they did
unto thee evil, and now we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of
thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him. And his brethren also went and fell
down before his face, and they said, Behold, we be thy servants. And Joseph said unto them,
Fear not, for am I in the place of God. But as for you ye thought evil against me, but
God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
Now therefore fear ye not, I will nourish you and your little ones. And he comforted
them and spake kindly unto them. And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his father's house.
And Joseph lived and a hundred and ten years. And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third
generation. The children also of Maker, the son of Manasseh, were brought up upon Joseph's
knees. And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die, and God will surely visit you and bring
you out of this land, unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you,
and he shall carry up my bones from hence. So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years
old, and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.